---
layout: story
title:  David Epstein - Range
thumbnail: '/img/story/Range.jpg'
---

The rewards of self experimentation
======
This is David Epstein's search for why late specialists become extraordinary successful in life across the board. Epstein found that a lot of highly accomplished athletes, CEOs, scientists, and artists are not specialised until older, defying the typical profile of a prodigy. Most continued to switch field, directions, styles, and projects throughout life; some are motivated by curiosity and others are searching for the work that "perfect match" to their skills and interests. Epstein called these people **generalists** in the book, due to their wide scope of knowledge accumulated along their many episodes of different experiences. It seemed that their ability to bring in ideas from other fields allow them to solve problems outside the box, thus a big success. This is the first part of the book, that he encouraged people, young graduates especially, to try more different career paths, explore job options and be bold to switch.

#### Inter-disciplinary successes
What I found interesting is the later parts of the book, which discuss about generalists and specialists in corporation cultures and crisis management. The three most impressive examples are 1) infrastructure over budget 2) failure in interest rate prediction by banks and 3) NASA challenger tragedy. 

In cases 1 and 2, specialists' depth of knowledges and focus on details made them become over optimistic about their own projects. Comparing with similar cases helps to rescale their prospects; still most specialists hold on to their views and underestimate time and budgets for their projects.
Another problem specialists face is their incapability to consider information outside their expertises in a systematic way. The author use the metaphor of birds and frogs, frogs digs too deep and lose the big picture, birds see the breadth of the landscape but don't know the details. In the ideal world, both depth and breadth are vital for success. 

Using the NASA *Challenger* accident as a case study, the author points out that specialists rely on their tools (in this case quantitative data analytics) and work culture hierarchy that they forego common sense. They failed to pause the launch of the space shuttle in a exceptionally cold day as they overlooked the missing data of how the components of the spaceship response in low temperature. When NASA managers and chief scientists had to handle this unusual situation, they leaned on the hierarchy and ignored the warnings from the lower level engineers. That led to implosion of the rocket and all astronauts died as the spaceship disassembled in the air. Indeed, specialists are like hedgehogs, they have one big idea and see everything through the lens of their expertises. Sometimes, they twist logic and arrange facts to fit their narratives.

Even though we have examined the important role of a generalist, Epstein discovered that it does not give any incentive in our culture to help nurturing generalists. Our culture encourages early commitment to specalise, dislike inefficiency and limit explorations. This trend is particularly severe in science, making people to deliver before starting a project. Epstein implied that our decline of scientific innovations is partly due to such short-sightedness on success and breakthroughs.

#### Is generalists unicorns in real life?
The book is a great read overall. It highlights the benefits generalising from personal development to innovations in mankind history. But I am unsure about a few of the stories he told and how these pass life trajectories relate to the nowadays job market.
First there are a set of examples that strictly speaking the person just switch projects, in a highly specialised area. I mean top athletes switching sports, artists switching styles and scientists studying a different question do not make them any more general, do they? In the end they are still working within their professions. And there are a lot of useful skills shared between the previous and new work. They are not as narrowly specialised, but specialised nonetheless. The so-called generalists being able to generalise is not because of extraordinary flexibility, in my view, it is because whatever they choose to switch to, there were considerable underlying skills they could bring into the new challenge from their past expertise. 

We all somehow had preferences, which bias us to certain exposures, more often than others. Given these preferences and skills, we can be fit for a set of jobs, seemingly diverse but required the same transferable skill set and appeal to us in similar way. Furthermore, our brain is highly connected. Two seemingly unrelated abilities, i.e. maths and music, occupied the same brain region. Thus the classification of generalists need further refinement.

Secondly, I found that this book was used in a few motivation videos as reassurance for people having to switch jobs all the time. I am very skeptical if this is the right interpretation at all for our current job market. I see the point of quitting, as mentioned in the book about military trainings, because people found out they do not feel they fit in. Fair enough, but look into today jobs, how diverse in terms of skill set are they? More precisely, if all of these jobs (at least in the white collar sector) are somewhat similar, how could I maximize my searching distant to find the peak? If switching jobs do not give us as much diverse development, we are just switching bosses. Somehow, we are stuck with what we didn't like in the old job, because the nature of work underneath different projects are similar.
In addition, most people cannot really completely change jobs these day as their past experiences are weight heavily in recruitment. So people are again stuck with the same stuff. Given all these consideration, this book would give a false sense of praise in not having a stable occupation and subsequently normalise our short term contracts and soul-sucking jobs that do not promote advancements and developments of individuals (like working in Amazon warehouse).

To strike a balance, I would point out that it wouldn't hurt to stay curious and try new things as a person would. This will make a life more fun and colorful. But we shall be more mindful of how we can cultivate our life to high diversity.
